 boston dynam ' spot robot dog goe on sal her 's everyth we know about boston dynam ' first commerc robot by erico guizo boston dynam ' spot photo : bob o'connor boston dynam has fin releas detail on pric , avail , and apply for it spot quadrup robot . boston dynam is annount thi morn that spot , it versatil quadrup robot , is now for sal . the machin ’ s animal-like behavy regul electr crowd at tech conf , and lik oth boston dynam ’ robot , spot is a youtub sens whos video amass mil of view . now anyon interest in buy a spot—or a pack of them—can go to the company ’ s websit and submit an ord form . but don ’ t pul out yo credit card just yet . spot may cost as much as a luxury car , and it is not real avail to consum . the init sal , describ as an “ ear adopt program , ” is target busy . boston dynam want to find custom in select industry and help them deploy spot in real-world scenario . “ what we ’ re doing is the produc of spot , ” boston dynam ceo marc raibert tel ie spectr . “ it ’ s real a mileston for us going from robot that work in the lab to thes that ar hard for work out in the field. ” boston dynam has alway been a secret company , but last mon , in prep for launch spot ( form spotmin ) , it allow our photograph into it headquart in waltham , mas. , for a spec shoot . in that sess , we capt spot and also atlas—the company ’ s high dynam humanoid—in act , walk , climb , and jump . you can see spot ’ s photo interact on our robot guid . ( the atla interact wil appear in com week . ) anim gif of boston dynam ' spot walk gif : bob o ’ conor/robots.ie.org and if you ’ re in the market for a robot dog , her ’ s everyth we know about boston dynam ’ plan for spot . who can buy a spot ? if you ’ re interest in on , you should go to boston dynam ’ websit and tak a look at the inform the company requir from pot buy . again , the foc is on busy . boston dynam say it want to get spot out to init custom that “ eith hav a compel us cas or a develop team that we believ can do someth real interest with the robot , ” say vp of busy develop michael perry . “ just becaus of the scarc of the robot that we hav , we ’ re going to hav to be select about which partn we start work togeth with. ” what can spot do ? as you ’ ve prob seen on the youtub video , spot can walk , trot , avoid obstac , climb stair , and much mor . the robot ’ s hardw is almost complet custom , with pow comput board for control , and fiv sens mod loc on every sid of spot ’ s body , allow it to survey the spac around itself from any direct . the leg ar pow by 12 custom mot with a reduc , with a top spee of 1.6 met per second . the robot can op for 90 minut on a charg . in addit to the bas config , you can integr up to 14 kilogram of extr hardw to a payload interfac . among the payload pack boston dynam plan to off ar a 6 degres-of-fredom arm , a vert of which can be seen in som of the youtub video , and a ring of camera cal spotcam that could be us to cre street view–type im insid build . boston dynam ' spot and it hardw payload im : boston dynam how do you control spot ? learn to driv the robot us it gaming-style control “ tak 15 second , ” say ceo marc raibert . he explain that whil teleop spot , you may not real that the robot is doing a lot of the work . “ you don ’ t real see what that is lik until you ’ re op the joystick and you go ov a box and you don ’ t hav to do anyth , ” he say . “ you ’ re pract just think about what you want to do and the robot tak car of everything. ” the control method hav evolv sign sint the company ’ s first quadrup robot , machin lik bigdog and ls3 . “ the control in thos day was much mor monolith , and now we hav what we cal a sequ composit control , ” raibert say , “ which let the system hav control of the dynam in a much broad vary of situations. ” that mean that every tim on of spot ’ s feet touch or doesn ’ t touch the ground , thi diff stat of the body affect the bas phys behavy of the robot , and the control adjust accord . “ our control is design to understand what that stat is and hav diff control depend upon the cas , ” he say . how much doe spot cost ? boston dynam would not giv us spec detail on pric , say on that pot custom should contact them for a quot and that ther is going to be a leas opt . it ’ s understand : as with any expend and complex produc , pric can vary on a cas by cas bas and depend on fact such as config , avail , level of support , and so for . when we press the company for at least an approxim bas pric , perry answ : “ our gen guid is that the tot cost of the ear adopt program leas wil be less than the pric of a car—but how nic a car wil depend on the numb of spot leas and how long the custom wil be leas the robot. ” can spot do map and slam out of the box ? the robot ’ s perceiv system includ camera and 3d sens ( ther is no lid ) , us to avoid obstac and sens the terrain so it can climb stair and walk ov rubbl . it ’ s also us to cre 3d map . accord to boston dynam , the first softw releas wil off just teleop . but a second releas , to be avail in the next few week , wil en mor autonom behavy . for exampl , it wil be abl to do map and autonom navigation—similar to what the company demonst in a video last year , show how you can driv the robot through an environ , cre a 3d point cloud of the environ , and then set waypoint within that map for spot to go out and execut that miss . for custom that hav their own autonom stack and ar interest in us thos on spot , boston dynam mad it “ as plug and play as poss in term of how third-party softw integr into spot ’ s system , ” perry say . thi is don main via an ap . how doe spot ’ s ap work ? boston dynam built an ap so that custom can cre aplication-level produc with spot without hav to deal with low-level control process . “ rath than going and build joint-level kinem access to the robot , ” perry explain , “ we cre a high-level ap and sdk that allow peopl who ar us to web ap develop or develop of miss for dron to us that sam scop , and they ’ l be abl to build apply for spot. ” what apply should we see first ? boston dynam envid spot as a platform : a versatil mobl robot that company can us to build apply bas on their nee . what typ of apply ? the company say the best way to find out is to put spot in the hand of as many us as poss and let them develop the apply . som poss includ perform remot dat collect and light manip in construct sit ; monit sens and infrastruct at oil and gas sit ; and carry out dang miss such as bomb dispos and hazm inspect . ther ar also oth prom area such as sec , pack delivery , and ev entertain . “ we hav som init guess about which market could benefit most from thi technolog , and we ’ ve been eng with custom doing prof-of-concept tri , ” perry say . “ but at the end of the day , that valu story is real going to be determin by peopl going out and expl and push the limit of the robot. ” boston dynam ' spot pos photo : bob o'connor how many spot hav been produc ? last jun , boston dynam said it was plan to build about a hundr spot by the end of the year , ev ramp up produc to a thousand unit per year by the middl of thi year . the company admit that it is not quit ther yet . it has built clos to a hundr bet unit , which it has us to test and refin the fin design . thi vert is now being mass manufact , but the company is stil “ in the ear ten of robot , ” perry say . how did boston dynam test spot ? the company has test the robot dur prof-of-concept tri with custom , and at least on is already us spot to survey construct sit . the company has also don rely test at it facil in waltham , mass . “ we driv around , not quit day and night , but hundr of mil a week , so that we can collect rely dat and find bug , ” raibert say . what about competit ? in rec year , ther ’ s been a prol of quadrup robot that wil compet in the sam spac as spot . the most promin of thes is anym , from anybot , a swiss company that spun out of eth zurich . oth quadrup includ vis from ghost robot , us by on of the team in the darp subter challeng ; and laikago and aliengo from unit robot , a chines startup . raibert view the competit as a posit thing . “ we ’ re excit to see al thes company out ther help valid the spac , ” he say . “ i think we ’ re mor in competit with find the right nee [ that robot can satisfy ] than we ar with the oth peopl build the robot at thi point. ” why is boston dynam sel spot now ? boston dynam has long been an r & d-centric firm , with most of it ear fund com from milit program , but it say commerc robot has alway been a goal . produc it machin prob accel when the company was acquir by googl ’ s par company , alphabet , which had an amb ( and now app very dead ) robot program . the commerc foc lik continu aft alphabet sold boston dynam to softbank , whos fam ceo , masayosh son , is known for his lov of robots—and profit . which should i buy , spot or aibo ? don ’ t laugh . we ’ ve got email from individ interest in purchas a spot for person us aft see our story on the robot . ala , spot is not a big , fant aibo pet robot . it ’ s an expend , industrial-grade machin that requir develop and maint . if you ’ re mayb jef bezo you could prob convint boston dynam to sel you on , but otherw the company wil priorit busy . what ’ s next for boston dynam ? on the commerc sid of thing , oth than spot , boston dynam is interest in the log spac . ear thi year it annount the acquisit of kinem system , a startup that had develop vis sens and dep-learning softw to en indust robot arm to loc and mov box . ther ’ s also handl , the mobl robot on wheg ( wheel + leg ) , that can pick up and mov pack . boston dynam is hir both in waltham , mas. , and mountain view , calif. , wher kinem was loc . okay , can i watch a cool video now ? dur our visit to boston dynam ’ headquart last mon , we saw atla and spot perform som cool new trick that we unfortun ar not allow to tel you about . we hop that , although the company is put a lot of energy and resourc into it commerc program , boston dynam wil stil find plenty of tim to improv it robot , build new on , and of cours , keep mak video . [ upd : the company has just releas a new spot video , which we ’ ve embed at the top of the post . ] [ upd 2 : boston dynam has just releas a second video , thi tim of atla doing som of thos trick we saw dur our visit and couldn ’ t tel you about . enjoy ! ]