boston dynamics ' spot robot dog goes on sale here 's everything we know about boston dynamics ' first commercial robot by erico guizo boston dynamics ' spot photo : bob o'connor boston dynamics has finally released details on price , availability , and applications for its spot quadruped robot . boston dynamics is announcing this morning that spot , its versatile quadruped robot , is now for sale . the machine ’ s animal-like behavior regularly electrifies crowds at tech conferences , and like other boston dynamics ’ robots , spot is a youtube sensation whose videos amass millions of views . now anyone interested in buying a spot—or a pack of them—can go to the company ’ s website and submit an order form . but don ’ t pull out your credit card just yet . spot may cost as much as a luxury car , and it is not really available to consumers . the initial sale , described as an “ early adopter program , ” is targeting businesses . boston dynamics wants to find customers in select industries and help them deploy spots in real-world scenarios . “ what we ’ re doing is the productization of spot , ” boston dynamics ceo marc raibert tells ie spectrum . “ it ’ s really a milestone for us going from robots that work in the lab to these that are hardened for work out in the field. ” boston dynamics has always been a secretive company , but last month , in preparation for launching spot ( formerly spotmini ) , it allowed our photographers into its headquarters in waltham , mas. , for a special shoot . in that session , we captured spot and also atlas—the company ’ s highly dynamic humanoid—in action , walking , climbing , and jumping . you can see spot ’ s photo interactives on our robots guide . ( the atlas interactives will appear in coming weeks . ) animated gif of boston dynamics ' spot walking gif : bob o ’ conor/robots.ie.org and if you ’ re in the market for a robot dog , here ’ s everything we know about boston dynamics ’ plans for spot . who can buy a spot ? if you ’ re interested in one , you should go to boston dynamics ’ website and take a look at the information the company requires from potential buyers . again , the focus is on businesses . boston dynamics says it wants to get spots out to initial customers that “ either have a compelling use case or a development team that we believe can do something really interesting with the robot , ” says vp of business development michael perry . “ just because of the scarcity of the robots that we have , we ’ re going to have to be selective about which partners we start working together with. ” what can spot do ? as you ’ ve probably seen on the youtube videos , spot can walk , trot , avoid obstacles , climb stairs , and much more . the robot ’ s hardware is almost completely custom , with powerful compute boards for control , and five sensor modules located on every side of spot ’ s body , allowing it to survey the space around itself from any direction . the legs are powered by 12 custom motors with a reduction , with a top speed of 1.6 meters per second . the robot can operate for 90 minutes on a charge . in addition to the basic configuration , you can integrate up to 14 kilograms of extra hardware to a payload interface . among the payload packages boston dynamics plans to offer are a 6 degres-of-fredom arm , a version of which can be seen in some of the youtube videos , and a ring of cameras called spotcam that could be used to create street view–type images inside buildings . boston dynamics ' spot and its hardware payload image : boston dynamics how do you control spot ? learning to drive the robot using its gaming-style controller “ takes 15 seconds , ” says ceo marc raibert . he explains that while teleoperating spot , you may not realize that the robot is doing a lot of the work . “ you don ’ t really see what that is like until you ’ re operating the joystick and you go over a box and you don ’ t have to do anything , ” he says . “ you ’ re practically just thinking about what you want to do and the robot takes care of everything. ” the control methods have evolved significantly since the company ’ s first quadruped robots , machines like bigdog and ls3 . “ the control in those days was much more monolithic , and now we have what we call a sequential composition controller , ” raibert says , “ which lets the system have control of the dynamics in a much broader variety of situations. ” that means that every time one of spot ’ s feet touches or doesn ’ t touch the ground , this different state of the body affects the basic physical behavior of the robot , and the controller adjusts accordingly . “ our controller is designed to understand what that state is and have different controls depending upon the case , ” he says . how much does spot cost ? boston dynamics would not give us specific details on prices , saying only that potential customers should contact them for a quote and that there is going to be a leasing option . it ’ s understandable : as with any expensive and complex product , prices can vary on a case by case basis and depend on factors such as configuration , availability , level of support , and so forth . when we pressed the company for at least an approximate base price , perry answered : “ our general guidance is that the total cost of the early adopter program lease will be less than the price of a car—but how nice a car will depend on the number of spots leased and how long the customer will be leasing the robot. ” can spot do mapping and slam out of the box ? the robot ’ s perception system includes cameras and 3d sensors ( there is no lidar ) , used to avoid obstacles and sense the terrain so it can climb stairs and walk over rubble . it ’ s also used to create 3d maps . according to boston dynamics , the first software release will offer just teleoperation . but a second release , to be available in the next few weeks , will enable more autonomous behaviors . for example , it will be able to do mapping and autonomous navigation—similar to what the company demonstrated in a video last year , showing how you can drive the robot through an environment , create a 3d point cloud of the environment , and then set waypoints within that map for spot to go out and execute that mission . for customers that have their own autonomy stack and are interested in using those on spot , boston dynamics made it “ as plug and play as possible in terms of how third-party software integrates into spot ’ s system , ” perry says . this is done mainly via an api . how does spot ’ s api works ? boston dynamics built an api so that customers can create aplication-level products with spot without having to deal with low-level control processes . “ rather than going and building joint-level kinematic access to the robot , ” perry explains , “ we created a high-level api and sdk that allows people who are used to web ap development or development of missions for drones to use that same scope , and they ’ l be able to build applications for spot. ” what applications should we see first ? boston dynamics envisions spot as a platform : a versatile mobile robot that companies can use to build applications based on their needs . what types of applications ? the company says the best way to find out is to put spot in the hands of as many users as possible and let them develop the applications . some possibilities include performing remote data collection and light manipulation in construction sites ; monitoring sensors and infrastructure at oil and gas sites ; and carrying out dangerous missions such as bomb disposal and hazmat inspections . there are also other promising areas such as security , package delivery , and even entertainment . “ we have some initial guesses about which markets could benefit most from this technology , and we ’ ve been engaging with customers doing prof-of-concept trials , ” perry says . “ but at the end of the day , that value story is really going to be determined by people going out and exploring and pushing the limits of the robot. ” boston dynamics ' spot posing photo : bob o'connor how many spots have been produced ? last june , boston dynamics said it was planning to build about a hundred spots by the end of the year , eventually ramping up production to a thousand units per year by the middle of this year . the company admits that it is not quite there yet . it has built close to a hundred beta units , which it has used to test and refine the final design . this version is now being mass manufactured , but the company is still “ in the early tens of robots , ” perry says . how did boston dynamics test spot ? the company has tested the robots during prof-of-concept trials with customers , and at least one is already using spot to survey construction sites . the company has also done reliability tests at its facility in waltham , mass . “ we drive around , not quite day and night , but hundreds of miles a week , so that we can collect reliability data and find bugs , ” raibert says . what about competitors ? in recent years , there ’ s been a proliferation of quadruped robots that will compete in the same space as spot . the most prominent of these is anymal , from anybotics , a swiss company that spun out of eth zurich . other quadrupeds include vision from ghost robotics , used by one of the teams in the darpa subterranean challenge ; and laikago and aliengo from unitre robotics , a chinese startup . raibert views the competition as a positive thing . “ we ’ re excited to see all these companies out there helping validate the space , ” he says . “ i think we ’ re more in competition with finding the right need [ that robots can satisfy ] than we are with the other people building the robots at this point. ” why is boston dynamics selling spot now ? boston dynamics has long been an r & d-centric firm , with most of its early funding coming from military programs , but it says commercializing robots has always been a goal . productizing its machines probably accelerated when the company was acquired by google ’ s parent company , alphabet , which had an ambitious ( and now apparently very dead ) robotics program . the commercial focus likely continued after alphabet sold boston dynamics to softbank , whose famed ceo , masayoshi son , is known for his love of robots—and profits . which should i buy , spot or aibo ? don ’ t laugh . we ’ ve gotten emails from individuals interested in purchasing a spot for personal use after seeing our stories on the robot . alas , spot is not a bigger , fancier aibo pet robot . it ’ s an expensive , industrial-grade machine that requires development and maintenance . if you ’ re maybe jef bezos you could probably convince boston dynamics to sell you one , but otherwise the company will prioritize businesses . what ’ s next for boston dynamics ? on the commercial side of things , other than spot , boston dynamics is interested in the logistics space . earlier this year it announced the acquisition of kinema systems , a startup that had developed vision sensors and dep-learning software to enable industrial robot arms to locate and move boxes . there ’ s also handle , the mobile robot on whegs ( wheels + legs ) , that can pick up and move packages . boston dynamics is hiring both in waltham , mas. , and mountain view , calif. , where kinema was located . okay , can i watch a cool video now ? during our visit to boston dynamics ’ headquarters last month , we saw atlas and spot performing some cool new tricks that we unfortunately are not allowed to tell you about . we hope that , although the company is putting a lot of energy and resources into its commercial programs , boston dynamics will still find plenty of time to improve its robots , build new ones , and of course , keep making videos . [ update : the company has just released a new spot video , which we ’ ve embedded at the top of the post . ] [ update 2 : boston dynamics has just released a second video , this time of atlas doing some of those tricks we saw during our visit and couldn ’ t tell you about . enjoy ! ]