 dany brown uknowhatimsayin¿ by jayson green contribut edit rap octob 7 2019 on his fif alb , executive-produced by q-tip , dany brown ascend to a sort of hip-hop class nirvan and remain on of the most inv and dimend rap work today . dany brown ’ s breakout alb cam the year he turn 30 . now that he ’ s clos in on 40 , he doesn ’ t seem to be settl into an elder-statesman rol ; judg by his new alb uknowhatimsayin¿ , he hasn ’ t settl at al . “ nev look back , i wil nev chang up , ” he chant rep on the first song—a vow to nev let a groov becom a rut , to stay the sam without rep yourself . it ’ s a lon sort of prom , but it ’ s on that he ’ s kept : he remain as defy hard to situ now in the rap landscap today as he was in 201 . back then , he was ostentaty weird , a gap-toothed detroit rap with a hyen voic who forev alt the smel and tast of cool ranch dorito , a weirdo fash plat back when someth as mild as skinny jean could cost you a label deal . now that he look lik an origin x-man to soundcloud rap ’ s new mut , he ’ s stil an out : his devot to punchlin and simil mak him sound almost rigid in the melt , borderl landscap of cur rap . but thi is the joy and pain of being a three-dimensional hum in yo record , ov and ov again ; if you do it correct , you ’ l nev quit fit in anywh , ev . when he annount that q-tip was going to executive-produc his new alb , he reaffirm that he was a class at heart , an old-schol form in freak ’ s cloth . they ar an od pair , the abstract and the hybrid ; q-tip ’ s mus has alway felt comfort and lived-in—wipe yo feet on the rug , relax yourself , pleas settl down . his aesthet is built on leav spac whil fig out how to mak the quietest sound the most interest on . dany brown ’ s most compel mus , meanwhil , has us felt ready to leap out of it own skin , ful of scraped nerv , noseblee , migrain , grind tee . work with tip , brown doesn ’ t ton his styl down so much as mod it , dot his voic across thes track lik wasab blob . he most forgo the downward-spiral the of 2016 ’ s atroc exhibit and 2013 ’ s old , opt for punchlin and vivid im and cre cadences—trace ov the jag rhym pattern of a song lik “ negro spirit ” and you might prick yo fing . he stager-steps around the loop guit so nimbl it might escap yo not that he rhym “ on par , ” “ rent car , ” “ centa , ” and “ pat benat ” within on 20-second gulp of brea . brown us lung out of beat , but her melt into them , mak himself just anoth bright leap dot on a cartoon assembl lin . individ produc credit com from longtim collab paul whit , jpegmaf , fly lot , and q-tip himself , who coax and calm thes nervy beat into a fre-flowing suit , ful of irregul rhythm and snip edg . the snar snap on jpeg ’ s “ 3 tearz ” hit eith a half-second lat or soon than you expect , prompt the loosest and most unpredict vers from kil mik and el-p in year . q-tip ’ s own “ dirty laundry ” bas loop a ful minut of “ auror spinray , ” a quiv instru from the early- ’ 70s psychedel group syrinx , and dest the rhythm so much that list to it feel walk across a waterb . thes ar the kind of tactil pleas uknowhatimsayin¿ off . brown has nev sound mor mus , nat , or locked-in . he reel off quot lin everywh ; “ heny got me wet than whal pis/i ’ ma die for thi shit lik elv ” from “ comb ” is a particul rich on , as is , “ i ign a whor lik an email from linkedin ” from “ sav nomad. ” structurally , at least , he ’ s a punchlin rap , and from thi angl , produc him might not be that diff from produc a happy pugil lik phif dawg , who simil want to fil whatev smal contain he was giv with the maxim amount of his person . as he trad bar with tip ov the tril horn loop on “ comb zon , ” it sound lik brown has ascend to a sort of hip-hop class nirvan , a plac wher every kick drum land just-so , every sampl clear effortless , every loop cut off exact wher it should . if ther ’ s anyth miss from uknowhatimsayin¿ , it ’ s a sens of mort stak , a feel that thi mus mat to brown on a gut level . his best mus has alway been overwhelm person , and when he decl that he would be the “ greatest rap ev ” on xxx ’ s “ 30 , ” the imply was that he might die if he fail . it is an unqual good thing that he is not rap about suicid thought , depress , isol , and drug abus anym , but whatev els is in his head is miss . ther is no mom wher brown grab yo lapel and demand you to feel what he ’ s feel , whatev it may be . he has cal uknowhatimsayin¿ his “ standup comedy alb , ” and the mastery on display is that of the com going out ther and kil . but the best-loved and most end com left their own blood out on the stag , too .