dany brown uknowhatimsayin¿ by jayson greene contributing editor rap october 7 2019 on his fifth album , executive-produced by q-tip , dany brown ascends to a sort of hip-hop classicist nirvana and remains one of the most inventive and dimensional rappers working today . dany brown ’ s breakout album came the year he turned 30 . now that he ’ s closing in on 40 , he doesn ’ t seem to be settling into an elder-statesman role ; judging by his new album uknowhatimsayin¿ , he hasn ’ t settled at all . “ never look back , i will never change up , ” he chants repeatedly on the first song—a vow to never let a groove become a rut , to stay the same without repeating yourself . it ’ s a lonely sort of promise , but it ’ s one that he ’ s kept : he remains as defiantly hard to situate now in the rap landscape today as he was in 201 . back then , he was ostentatiously weird , a gap-toothed detroit rapper with a hyena voice who forever altered the smell and taste of cool ranch doritos , a weirdo fashion plate back when something as mild as skinny jeans could cost you a label deal . now that he looks like an original x-man to soundcloud rap ’ s new mutants , he ’ s still an outlier : his devotion to punchlines and similes makes him sound almost rigid in the melted , borderles landscape of current rap . but this is the joy and pain of being a three-dimensional human in your records , over and over again ; if you do it correctly , you ’ l never quite fit in anywhere , ever . when he announced that q-tip was going to executive-produce his new album , he reaffirmed that he was a classicist at heart , an old-schol formalist in freak ’ s clothing . they are an odd pairing , the abstract and the hybrid ; q-tip ’ s music has always felt comfortable and lived-in—wipe your feet on the rug , relax yourself , please settle down . his aesthetic is built on leaving space while figuring out how to make the quietest sound the most interesting one . dany brown ’ s most compelling music , meanwhile , has usually felt ready to leap out of its own skin , full of scraped nerves , nosebleeds , migraines , grinding teeth . working with tip , brown doesn ’ t tone his style down so much as modulate it , dotting his voice across these tracks like wasabi blobs . he mostly forgoes the downward-spiral theatrics of 2016 ’ s atrocity exhibition and 2013 ’ s old , opting for punchlines and vivid images and creative cadences—trace over the jagged rhyme patterns of a song like “ negro spiritual ” and you might prick your finger . he stager-steps around the looped guitar so nimbly it might escape your notice that he rhymes “ on par , ” “ rental car , ” “ centaur , ” and “ pat benatar ” within one 20-second gulp of breath . brown usually lunges out of beats , but here melts into them , making himself just another bright leaping dot on a cartoon assembly line . individual production credits come from longtime collaborator paul white , jpegmafia , flying lotus , and q-tip himself , who coaxes and calms these nervy beats into a fre-flowing suite , full of irregular rhythms and snipped edges . the snare snap on jpeg ’ s “ 3 tearz ” hits either a half-second later or sooner than you expect , prompting the loosest and most unpredictable verses from killer mike and el-p in years . q-tip ’ s own “ dirty laundry ” basically loops a full minute of “ aurora spinray , ” a quivering instrumental from the early- ’ 70s psychedelic group syrinx , and destabilizes the rhythm so much that listening to it feels walking across a waterbed . these are the kinds of tactile pleasures uknowhatimsayin¿ offers . brown has never sounded more musical , natural , or locked-in . he reels off quotable lines everywhere ; “ heny got me wetter than whale pis/i ’ ma die for this shit like elvis ” from “ combat ” is a particularly rich one , as is , “ i ignore a whore like an email from linkedin ” from “ savage nomad. ” structurally , at least , he ’ s a punchline rapper , and from this angle , producing him might not be that different from producing a happy pugilist like phife dawg , who similarly wanted to fill whatever small container he was given with the maximum amount of his personality . as he trades bars with tip over the trilling horn loop on “ combat zone , ” it sounds like brown has ascended to a sort of hip-hop classicist nirvana , a place where every kick drum lands just-so , every sample clears effortlessly , every loop cuts off exactly where it should . if there ’ s anything missing from uknowhatimsayin¿ , it ’ s a sense of mortal stakes , a feeling that this music matters to brown on a gut level . his best music has always been overwhelmingly personal , and when he declared that he would be the “ greatest rapper ever ” on xxx ’ s “ 30 , ” the implication was that he might die if he failed . it is an unqualified good thing that he is not rapping about suicidal thoughts , depression , isolation , and drug abuse anymore , but whatever else is in his head is missing . there is no moment where brown grabs your lapels and demands you to feel what he ’ s feeling , whatever it may be . he has called uknowhatimsayin¿ his “ standup comedy album , ” and the mastery on display is that of the comic going out there and killing . but the best-loved and most enduring comedians left their own blood out on the stage , too .